foreign
[Music]
what you see in front of you is our
freshly painted Datsun project and
clearly the results are excellent
we want to show you how to paint your
car at home and get the same great
results
[Music]
so in diving into the Bodywork on a
project you may not know what's hiding
beneath the paint in that case the best
move might be to strip it to Bare Metal
start with a clean slate and that's what
we did with the dots in here
using a combination of tools including a
DA Sanders our SCT and chemical
stripping we'll get this car back to the
Bare Bones so we can see what's in front
of us
sure enough we did find some old body
filler hiding
we finished conditioning the metal by
going over the entire car with the SCT
if you don't have that you can use a DA
with 80 grit paper
now that the car is still stripped of
all old issues we need to prevent some
rusting and give us a base to start
working from so we apply a couple coats
of our Eastwood epoxy primer over the
entire car
note that the body filler we'll be using
can be applied over bare metal or over
the primer we're opting for primer as it
better fits our timeline and gives us a
visual indicator of highs and lows you
can do either method just make sure to
follow the product guidelines now that
our car isn't going to rust away on us
we can move on to the next step body
filler
[Music]
once the epoxy primer has hardened for
at least two to three days we give the
panel entire wipe down with pre-painting
prep to remove any dust and contaminants
on this project we're also showcasing
our new dustless Sandy block or dsb
which is why we have the shop split in
half
we have more videos on the dsb and you
can check them out on our YouTube
channel but let's just say this thing
works whatever your preferred block is
you can start blocking the whole car
with 80 grit sandpaper make sure to work
on a cross hatch x-patter and move
across the panel so it comes out nice
and flat you'll probably have an idea of
problem areas going into this step
anywhere you did metal work old repairs
dents Etc but this will quickly reveal
the highs and lows across each panel
the dark spots are the areas where your
block can't get into that's why they're
there it's unsanded primer these are the
areas that we'll work on later using the
filler on this project I made a door
skin shave some holes and replace lower
quarter panels and other rust areas so I
knew these areas would need some
attention once you have the whole car
blocked with 80 give it another wipe
down with pre and start adding filler
now there are two general approaches to
filler you can either spot repair and
just add filler to your low spots or you
can skim coat the entire panel sanding
most of it off but knowing that your
panel is going to be flat we did a bit
of both on the doors fenders and roof we
opted to skim coat everything as there
were a lot of imperfections across these
panels
the hood was mostly straight so we went
with the spot method either way you can
get the same results it's just a matter
of preference
I mentioned the Contour DSP This Thing
Really Works it collects about 95
percent of the dust from your filler
which is going to eliminate this ruining
your shop and your life also we added a
nylon blocking plate to the bottom of
this thing which is going to cut the
filler fast and super flat if you're
going to be doing body work I highly
recommend getting one of these after
this first big skim coat is sanded down
and we think we're ready for more filler
we once again clean everything by
blowing the car off wiping down with
pre-painting prep we still need to apply
filler to the rest of the panels but the
highs and lows are not as obvious so we
sprayed the core with guide coat to
identify these spots as well as all over
our filler to check those areas we're
also straight and smooth
now with our highs and lows identified
we can continue sanding the car with 80
grit applying filler as necessary to the
dark low spots and checking with guide
coat until we get the car pretty
straight
another layer of guide coat and we can
work on sanding out our 80 grit
scratches by working through our finer
sanding grits 180 220 and 320. you'll
know you can move on when you no longer
see scratches in the guide code from the
previous Grit
foreign
if you find surface defects and pinholes
you can use our glazing putty to spot
treat those areas simply mix it up just
like normal filler and block along with
the rest of the body we're using our
glazing putty because it's softer and
flows and we can continue with the grit
paper that we're using so we don't have
to take a couple steps back and repeat
the process
this is the longest step in the process
so be patient and take your time we have
several eight hour days of Bodywork into
this car but in the end your time will
pay off
once you're happy with the filler you
can move on to the next step which is
applying primer
[Music]
our body work is looking good and we're
anxious because we're ready to start
moving towards paint just like anything
else there are a lot of preferred
methods and workflows when going from
metal work through primer and paint
production shops will often coat which
is urethane primer while show car might
get two or three rounds of high build
polyester
we're going to show you the method we
did on this car and if you follow these
you'll get great results too for our
first coat we're going to use our
optiflow epoxy primer we'll go with
epoxy to seal all the body work up and
because it has great adhesion to both
metal and filler the kit also makes it
super easy for anyone to do in their
driveway or shop without needing an air
compressor paint gun or worrying about
overspray the kit includes everything
you need to apply including trays mixing
cups and rollers we use the included 2K
aerospray cans to hit all the hard to
reach areas and then roll two coats of
epoxy working from the hood back panel
by panel next we let it get nice and
hard for a couple days before blocking
with 320 grit this stage is also pretty
rewarding because we get to evaluate how
the car is looking in one solid color
at this point you could go one of two
ways urethane primer if your body work
is pretty straight and ready for paint
which we also offer as part of the
optiflow system
or if you still have some Sandy
scratches you can spray with our
polyester primer polyester primer is
like sprayable body filler and is
designed to fill the small imperfections
it's great for beginners as it's an
extra chance to get your panel straight
before paint we opt for the polyester to
fill in some remaining sanding scratches
we had missed and to help sharpen up
those Body Lines one last time
we do three full coats at a polyester
and let it set up over the weekend our
gun settings are 30 to 35 PSI a 2.0
needle nozzle 12 inch fan pattern and
three wet coats with about 15 minute
flash time in between
[Music]
with all the primer we should need on
the car we can apply another layer of
guide coat do a final block sand
[Music]
ING with 320 grit and 400 will finish
with 600 grit
just like on body filler your goal here
is to not have any sanding scratches
from the rougher grits visible as you
move on
if you find yourself struggling to get
sanding scratches out but the panel is
straight you can always wipe everything
down apply another coater to a primer
and begin blocking again
accidents happen got some cut throughs
and also some fillers showing so we'll
mix up what's called a seal coat
basically it's taking our epoxy and
reducing an additional 20 percent what
this does is it covers your bare spots
it gives you one uniform color on the
car in preparation for base coat this is
actually nice because a lot of painters
prefer applying base over the sealer
rather than your polyester primers
sealants can be top coated in the same
day or sprayed hardened and scuffed
before your base with the primer
finished to 600 grit or sealed we can
move on to the next step where we'll lay
down some color
[Music]
as far as prepped and you're ready to
bust out the paint gun but before you go
spraying your now super straight car
it's worthwhile to do a test panel to
make sure you have everything dialed in
just right
you have a lot of options when choosing
paint for your ride from single stage to
multi-stage system the single stage
paint job is basically a base coat and
clear coat in one formula meaning you
don't have to apply a separate base and
clear it's all done in one step this is
a great beginner and budget friendly
option the most common option is what
we're going to do a base coat clear coat
system we're using our OEM select base
coat for this project as it offers over
75 000 OEM colors where we found the
perfect shade of gray for this Datsun if
you want to browse our library of OEM
select colors check out the link in our
description
we prep a spare body panel we had laying
around and fill our paint gun while
using a strainer
for our base coat we're using a 1.3
needle about 15 psi and we're making
sure we have 50 overlap between each
pass you'll start by spraying color on
your edges and then making even passes
back and forth across your panel
we're not laying clear so we want it to
be a medium wetness not glossy with
about 15 minute flash time between coats
we apply three coats and since this is a
metallic we'll opt to do a drop coat a
drop coat is your final pass to make
metallics layout nice and even to do one
lower the pressure a few PSI move about
double the distance away from the panel
and in a movement as you see here
if you're not spraying a metallic you
can skip this step and move on after
three coats of bass
moving on to our clear coat we're using
our premium show clear and medium
activator as it's about 72 degrees in
our inflatable Booth the clear needs to
be mixed with the activator at a ratio
four to one using the mixing cup you'll
find a four to one ratio column add
clear to the fill line next take your
activator and add to the corresponding
fill line then use a stir to mix we set
the gun up with the same 1.3 needle 28
PSI and a 10 inch fan powder
while not necessary we have to do a tack
coat on the first pass attack code is a
semi-dry coat that helps promote
adhesion and prevent runs then follow up
with two wet on wet coats with about 15
minute flash between
our test panel came out great so now we
can apply these techniques to the car
now here's where we Face another
decision how do you color and clear on
the jams of the car also known as cut it
you can either blow the car apart paint
the jams paddles and body individually
or you can paint the jam specifically
reassemble and then paint the body
for cutting the goal is to paint all the
areas that aren't accessible once the
car is assembled so we pop off the doors
deck lid and open the hood so we can
reach these spots
now you can tape up the car to prevent
overspraying the interior and under hood
using a technique called back taping
this is where we tape on the back side
of pinch welds and seams so we don't
create hard tape lines
we wipe down with pre-painting prep we
follow that up with a tack rag which is
a sticky cloth that will pick up any
remaining dust dirt or lint
with the car clean we can start spraying
focusing on the jams and letting color
blow onto the body now we'll address
this later
the color applied We can spray the clear
on using the settings we tested earlier
the great thing about performing cut in
is it gives you another opportunity to
get used to your gun paints and moving
around the vehicle before spraying the
part that everyone's eyes will be on
with that finished we let our paint get
hard for two days Bolt the panels back
on and move on to painting the body
the Datsun is reassembled now we can
address the overspray all over the body
we'll grab a DA with an interface pad
and 600 grit and give the whole car a
buzz down
additionally we use gray scuff pads for
anywhere the da can't reach well and to
make sure our surface is smooth to
promote good adhesion we shouldn't have
any shiny surfaces once we're done here
next we're on the final prep for paint
we blow the car off and wipe down with
pre-painting prep now we can tape up
everything we don't want paint to get on
for us this means all the windows under
hood tail light gaps and our freshly
painted jams
so we use a combination of back taping
which we discussed earlier and foam tape
to get this job done
[Music]
with the car loaded into Booth our
painter gives it a final wipe down with
pre-painting prep and an attack Rag and
start spraying some base coat using the
same settings we determined on our test
panel
[Music]
after three coats plus the drop coat
she's on to clear one note here is to
make sure you maintain a wet Edge while
moving around the full car for example
move from the quarter to the door to the
fender don't jump around the car you
want to avoid spraying over clear that
has flashed as it won't lay out nice
after two good coats we're all finished
we don't have a heated Booth so we'll
let this sit for as long as we can
before disturbing for us that was about
three hours in the booth then we're able
to move it out in the studio and let
that cure over the weekend and voila you
now have a freshly painted car
depending on how your paint job comes
out you might be happy enough to stop
here we're pretty happy seeing this
thing looking shiny in the studio but we
did have a bit of dirt and to clear some
orange peel and a couple runs and if
it's your first time you most likely
have an issue or two as well but that's
not a problem at all we let this sit for
about a week and we move on to the final
step cutting and buffing
[Music]
all right so you have Bodywork primed
sanded and painted but maybe you have a
few issues that happen to everyone in
the booth
we'll start by addressing the runs and
then we'll talk about cutting dirt and
orange peel I tackled the Run by dry
sanding with 800 grit on a block you can
focus on the high spots and do a slight
bit of cross blocking as you get it
close to Flat once it's about 90 percent
there switch over to wet sanding 1000
grit until it's completely flat using
the cross blocking technique
now our Run's gone but we have orange
peel dirt and 1000 grit scratches in our
door all of these get addressed at once
take 1500 grit on a DA an interface pad
and wet sand the entire door including
over the now flat run making sure to
avoid your edges though
periodically wipe down the door so you
can check your progress once the texture
is gone shown here we hit the edges and
Body Lines with our 1500 by hand and
then switch over to 2000 grit on the DA
for a few more passes to make sure our
1500 grit scratches are all sanded out
now our door is super flat and we just
need to bring that shine back to do that
we recommend using a three-step system
starting with an aggressive cutting
compound wool pad and finishing with
foam pads and polishing compounds
applying your cutting compound to the
face of the wool pad and spread it
around the panel you're working on then
add a little speed to the buffer and
coat the work area in an even layer
now this part will take a little
practice ramp up the buffer to full
speed and move across the paddle with a
little bit of pressure
you want to keep the PAD as close to
Flat as you can I typically ride the
right hand side and move horizontally
along the panel this keeps the pad
spinning down and gives me the best
control after several passes in an area
you should start seeing that shine come
back in your panel once your panel has
to shine back and it's not coming up any
further wipe it down with a microfiber
and move on to the next foam pad and
step two compound the goal for step two
is to remove any Haze Left Behind from
Step One the process is the same just
with foam and you won't need to hit this
as long or as aggressively
finally repeat for step three
now our doors show car flat with no runs
dirt or orange peel
we spent about a day addressing the rest
of the car and Bam show car Datsun
[Music]
the results really speak for themselves
here this thing looks amazing
[Music]
every step of the process has worked
towards getting the great results that
we're proud of and that you can do at
home too by following these steps and
taking your time using high quality
blocks high quality paint primers elbow
grease and buffers there's no reason why
you can't achieve this at home
we really want to help you with this
process so we've put together a full PDF
showing you the six steps we have listed
here and which products we used in each
as always for more information click the
link in the description or head over to
eastwood.com
foreign
[Music]